.. _introduction:

Introduction
============
PhaseGen is a population genetic coalescent simulator that leverages phase-type theory to provide exact solutions for various population genetic scenarios. PhaseGen can simulate multiple demes and migration between them, supports recombination between two loci, multiple merger coalescents, and handle variable population sizes and migration rates over time. To ensure correctness, PhaseGen has been extensively tested against `msprime <https://tskit.dev/msprime/docs/stable/intro.html>`_ for a wide variety of demographic scenarios and statistics.

Motivation
----------
Coalescent simular such as `msprime <https://tskit.dev/msprime/docs/stable/intro.html>`_, while being very fast and flexible, provide stochastic solutions. This necessitates the use of Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) for parameter estimation, which can be computationally expensive. A set of tools that do, in principle, provide exact solutions are forward simulators, such as `dadi <https://dadi.readthedocs.io/en/latest>`_ and `moments <https://moments.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html>`_. However, Forward simulators, while having the great advantage of being able to incorporate selection, have different caveats associated with model initialization, choice of run times, and they tend to be overall less efficient than backward simulations. PhaseGen is particularly useful in settings where exact solutions of the coalescent are required. The availability of exact solutions also allows for the use of gradient-based optimization methods for parameter estimation, such as maximum likelihood estimation, which can be more efficient than ABC in some cases.